Hey everyone, my name is Sam Oh, and
welcome to the SEO fundamentals course
by Ahrefs. In this course, I'll be
teaching you the fundamentals of SEO
with a heavy focus on execution. And
while it's a beginner's SEO course, I
don't want you to be fooled by the word
beginner. Even for an eight-figure
business like ours, we don't do anything
crazy technical or complicated. Right
from the start, we've stuck with the
fundamentals of SEO that led to
compounded growth. And today, our site
gets over a million monthly visits from
Google search alone. Making SEO one of
our most effective strategies to get
traffic to our site. So, the course is
broken down into four modules plus this
video, which is more of an introduction
to the course as well as an SEO 101. In
this video, we'll go over the basics of
SEO and cover things like what it is,
why it's important, and how it works.
You'll then move on to module one, which
is on keyword research. Throughout these
lessons, I'll show you how to find
keywords to target that can benefit your
business. It'll also set the foundation
for the next module, which is on-page
SEO. In this module, we'll talk about
optimizing your pages to rank for those
keywords. The next module will be on
link building. This is one of Google's
most prominent ranking signals, which
has proven to contribute to higher
rankings in search. Finally, we'll
finish off the course with the basics of
technical SEO, which will mostly be
about best practices and website
maintenance.
All right, let's kick things off with
the SEO basics. We'll talk about what
search engine optimization is, why it's
important, and how Google works.
SEO stands for search engine
optimization, and it's the process of
optimizing content to be discovered
through a search engine's organic search
results. Now, let's talk a bit about how
they work. If you're completely new to
SEO, then it's easiest to think of
search engines as libraries. But instead
of storing books, they store copies of
websites and web pages.
So, when you search for a query, the
search engine will then look through all
pages in its index and try to return the
most relevant results. And SEO helps
demonstrate to search engines that your
page is that result. Now, you might be
thinking, why should I focus on SEO when
there are so many other marketing
mediums? Well, there are three major
things that attract marketers to search
engine optimization. And in my opinion,
these three things make SEO the best
traffic source. Number one, unlike
paying for ads, search traffic is free.
Number two, organic traffic is typically
consistent once you're ranking high.
Whereas other mediums like social media
and email marketing often result in
traffic spikes that usually end up
fading to nothing. And it makes sense,
because social media networks are
designed to surface fresh content.
Emails often get marked as read,
forgotten, or land in the spam box.
Whereas search traffic is a result of
users actively searching for
information. And the number of searches
for a given topic is typically
consistent month to month. And number
three, you have the opportunity to reach
massive audiences you wouldn't have
access to otherwise. In fact, as of
October 2019, there were nearly 4.39
billion internet users around the world.
And almost 4 billion of those people are
Google users. This is why search engine
optimization is an 80 billion-dollar
industry and why marketers from all
walks of life are adopting and pursuing
it today. Everyone wants their business
to get discovered, and SEO is the
perfect way to do that. Now, let's
briefly talk about how Google works. And
there are two parts to this. The first
is crawling and indexation. And these
two things are what actually allows
Google to discover web pages and create
their search index. So, to actually
attain information, Google uses
crawlers, also known as spiders, which
gather publicly available information
from all over the web. The spiders will
start crawling from a list of known URLs
called seeds. Then they follow the
hyperlinks on those pages and crawl
those newly discovered pages.
And this process goes on and on,
allowing them to collect a ton of
information. They then take all of this
data back to Google servers to be added
to their search index. And that's what
people like you and I are searching
through when we key in a query in
Google. Now, if you were to search for
something and Google returned every
result that mentioned your words on the
page, then you'd end up with really bad
results. This brings us to the second
part, which is Google's ranking
algorithm.
Google has hundreds of ranking signals,
and they make tweaks to their algorithm
500 to 600 times per year. So, to be
frank, no one knows exactly how their
algorithm works. But they've given us
clues and some guidelines to better
understand the factors that are most
important. In addition, third-party
companies like ours have done studies to
test and better understand these
factors. Now, I won't bore you with over
200 ranking signals, many which are just
speculation at best. But I do want to
cover a few of the most important
factors that you'll need to understand
from a fundamental standpoint. First are
backlinks. Backlinks are links from a
page on one website to another. And
Google has said on their how search
works page that if other prominent
websites link to a page, that's proven
to be a good sign that information is
well trusted. The easiest way to
understand the value of a backlink is to
think of them as votes. When a page
receives a backlink, it's essentially
another website vouching for the content
on the page. And the more votes you get
from credible sources, the higher the
trust. And we also studied the effect of
backlinks on search traffic and found a
clear positive correlation between
backlinks from unique websites and a
page's organic traffic.
Second is search intent, which
represents the reason behind a
searcher's query. And if you think of
Google's goal for search, their job is
to return the most relevant results for
any given query. So, with that said, you
can discover search intent simply by
looking at the top ranking pages for the
query you want to rank for. For example,
if you search for slow cooker recipes,
you'll see that the search results are
mostly blog posts with a list of slow
cooker recipes. So, if you try and rank
a product page where you're selling a
slow cooker, you won't be matching
search intent, and therefore, you won't
rank.
Now, if we change the query to just slow
cooker, you'll see that the dominant
types of pages are e-commerce category
pages. So, if you try and rank your blog
post of slow cooker recipes, then you
probably won't rank because you're not
matching search intent. This is a
critical concept to understand, and I'll
share a simple three-point checklist you
can use to determine search intent for
any query in the next module. And third
is content depth. Search engines are
made up of computer programs. So, they
can't actually read and understand text
like you and I would. Nevertheless,
Google has poured billions of dollars
into creating sophisticated technology
that understands content to a certain
degree. But it's your job as a content
creator to provide context about the
subject. For example, if you look at the
top ranking pages for the query how to
drive a car, you'll find that they talk
about things like fastening your
seatbelt, familiarizing yourself with
the gas and brake pedals, adjusting your
seat and mirrors, and other things that
a first-time driver may not know.
Basically, you want to be able to answer
the searcher's query the best that you
possibly can. And naturally, it should
lead to content that has depth. Now,
it's important to note that depth
doesn't always translate to length. For
example, a topic like how to turn off
iPhone 12 doesn't need to and shouldn't
be long. In fact, the top ranking page
is only 185 words. But the content
itself solves the user's query from
start to finish. All right, so the
basics are in the book, and it's time to
move on to the keyword research module.
Hey, it's Sam Oh, and welcome to the
first module, which is on keyword
research. In this first lesson, we're
going to talk about what keywords are
and how to choose them using a simple
four-point checklist. Let's get started.
So, what are keywords in the context of
SEO? They're simply just words and
phrases that people type into search
engines to find what they're looking
for. For example, if you were shopping
for running shoes, you might search for
keywords like men's running shoes or
simply just running shoes. Now, keywords
are actually super important in SEO
because it sets the entire foundation
for search engine optimization. The
basic goal of SEO is to rank your pages
for keywords that your target audience
or customers are searching for. And if
you're not ranking for keywords that
actually get searched, then your SEO
efforts are kind of meaningless. For
example, we rank number one for the
query SEO checklist. And this keyword is
responsible for driving around 1,500
monthly visitors from Google, and that's
just in the US. So, keyword research is
the process of finding keywords that
people are inputting into search
engines. And we'll get into this process
in the upcoming lessons. So, how do you
actually choose keywords that are worth
targeting? Let's run through a checklist
that should help you choose keywords
effectively.
The first thing to check is if your
keyword has search demand. Search demand
represents the volume of monthly
searches made for a keyword. And this is
measurable with a keyword metric that we
call search volume.
You can find the search volume for a
keyword by using a keyword research tool
like Ahrefs Keywords Explorer. For
example, the query kilometers to miles
gets searched around 478,000
times per month in the US alone. But as
you can see here in Ahrefs Keywords
Explorer, 80% of searches go without a
click to a page. And that's because
Google has a handy calculator right here
that'll solve the searcher's problem.
So, search volume alone can actually be
a bit misleading, which is why it's
worth looking at the second checkpoint,
which is to check the traffic potential
of the topic.
Traffic potential represents the total
search traffic you could get if you were
to rank at the top of Google for your
keyword.
Let's look at the stats for our SEO
checklist page in Ahrefs Site Explorer.
So, again, we rank number one for the
query SEO checklist, and it sends us
approximately 1,500 monthly search
visits from the US.
But, if we look at the total global
organic traffic to the page, you'll see
that we get approximately 3,000 monthly
visits from Google every single month.
And that's because this page ranks for
over 200 keywords. And this page isn't
an outlier. In our study of 3 million
keywords, we found that on average, the
top-ranking page ranks for nearly a
thousand other keywords in the top 10.
So, while you may be optimizing your
pages for a main keyword, your page will
likely rank for hundreds or even
thousands of other relevant keywords.
And because of that, the monthly search
traffic potential of the topic SEO
checklist is actually higher than its
monthly search volume.
This is what makes traffic potential a
much more reliable metric than search
volume. And the way you determine
traffic potential is by looking at how
much traffic the top-ranking pages are
getting.
For example, if we go to Ahrefs Keywords
Explorer and search for submit website
to search engines, you'll see that it
has a search volume of 1,100 monthly
searches in the US.
Now, if I scroll to the bottom of the
page, you'll see a SERP overview, which
shows you the top 10 ranking pages for
that keyword. And SERP just stands for
search engine results page. And as you
can see, our page gets an estimated
5,300 monthly search visits from the US
alone. And we rank for over 1,300
keywords, making traffic potential of
this keyword higher than its search
volume.
Now, it doesn't always work out this
way. For example, the query keyword
cannibalization has a search volume of
150 monthly searches, but the traffic
potential is well under 100. So, it
becomes more of a business decision
whether you want to tackle the topic or
not.
Now, choosing keywords based on metrics
alone is not a good idea, which is why
the rest of the checkpoints are meant to
ground you.
The next point on our checklist is to
assess the business potential of the
keyword or topic.
Business potential simply represents the
value a keyword has to your business.
And value really comes down to your
niche as well as your business model.
So, an easy way to do this is by
assigning scores between one to three to
keywords you're researching. The higher
the number, the more important the topic
is to your business.
So, let's say you have a site about
golf, and the way you make money is by
selling used golf clubs.
Bringing this back to business
potential, that means topics where you
can organically recommend products to
visitors would hold the highest business
value. For example, people searching for
something like buy used golf clubs are
likely ready to make a purchase here and
now. So, in my books, this would have a
business value of three.
Now, a keyword like best golf clubs
would also be relevant to your site.
People are likely ready to make a
purchase soon, but just don't know which
clubs to buy. But, it's actually quite
easy to plug your products because for
the golf clubs you recommend, you can
easily link back to your product pages,
leading visitors closer to making a
purchase. So, I'd give this a business
value of two. Now, a keyword like what
is a handicapping golf would be really
tough to organically recommend your
products. But, nevertheless, it's a way
to attract relevant traffic to your
site. So, I'd give this a business value
of one. So, these would hold the lowest
priority. And anything that has a score
of zero is probably worth ignoring
because it's not going to impact your
bottom line. So, something like Happy
Gilmore review would have a business
value of zero because it has nothing to
do with your business other than the
fact that it's a fantastic movie about
golf.
All right, the next point on this
checklist is to see if you can match
searcher intent. This is a concept that
we covered in the first lesson of this
course, but it's something that I'm
going to keep talking about because it's
super important. So, again, search
intent represents the reason behind a
searcher's query. And the way we
determine that is by looking at the
top-ranking pages for the keyword we
want to rank for.
For example, let's say you have a
recipes blog, and you want to rank for
toaster oven.
Looking at the top-ranking pages, you'll
see that almost all of the pages are
e-commerce category pages. This tells us
that the intent of the searcher is
likely to buy or at least to shop around
for different toaster ovens.
So, unless you can actually satisfy the
intent of the searcher, it's unlikely
that you'll be able to rank high for
this query. And we'll dig deeper into
search intent in the next lesson. The
final point on this checklist is to
determine whether you can rank for your
keyword.
Search volume, traffic potential, and
business potential mean absolutely
nothing if you can't rank for your
keyword in the not-so-distant future.
And understanding the level of
difficulty to rank for a given keyword
takes a bit of analysis and practice.
This is why I've created an entire
lesson on assessing ranking difficulty
because mastering this process will help
you get predictable results in SEO. So,
I'll save that for a later lesson.
Now, actually choosing keywords comes
down to finding a balance in this
checklist. You have to ask yourself,
does the topic drive enough traffic and
have business value to make it worth the
effort? And this is the question you
should ask yourself before you create
pages with the intent to rank in search.
And these five points in the checklist
are exactly what we're going to dive
deeper into throughout the rest of this
module.
Hey, it's Sam-O, and welcome to the
second lesson, which is on search
intent. And I touched on this in the
first lesson on SEO basics, but I really
want to take some time to unpack what it
is and how to use it in keyword
research. Reason being, if you can't
match searcher intent, then you probably
aren't going to rank for your target
keywords.
So, again, search intent represents the
reason behind a searcher's query. And
matching search intent is one of those
must-do things to show search engines
that your page will fulfill their goal.
To deliver the most relevant results for
any given query.
And while it might sound like you're
trying to satisfy Google, what you're
actually doing is learning what you need
to do to satisfy the searcher's intent.
Identifying search intent is usually
quite easy. All you have to do is search
for the keyword you want to rank for,
and then analyze the top-ranking
results. And the top-ranking results are
a great proxy to understand search
intent because Google understands what
searchers want probably more than anyone
else.
Now, analyzing is kind of a jargony
word, but I have a simple three-pronged
formula you can use. It's called the
three C's of search intent.
The first C is content type. Content
type can usually be categorized into
blog posts, videos, product category,
and landing pages.
For example, the dominant type of pages
for the query best golf shoes are blog
posts.
The second C is content format. And this
applies more to blog posts and landing
pages. A few common blog formats you'll
see are how-tos, step-by-step tutorials,
list posts, and opinion editorials.
For a landing page, that might be
something like a tool or calculator.
Again, for the query best golf shoes,
you'll see that all of the top results
are listicals, which makes sense because
the word best implies that a comparison
needs to be made.
And the third C is content angle, which
often depicts the benefit. It's
basically your hook as to why someone
should click and visit your page. For
best golf shoes, you'll see that every
post has gone with a freshness angle,
which is evident based on the current
year being in the titles.
In my opinion, this is the least
important and often least consistent
among top-ranking pages.
Now, this is just one example of search
intent for a keyword. Let's go through a
few more examples to really drill in
this concept.
The first example is for the query how
to swing a golf club. The dominant
content type is clearly blog posts, but
you'll also notice that a YouTube video
is ranking ahead of the blog posts. So,
this tells us that it may be worth
creating both a blog post and video to
potentially get two different spots in
the search results.
As for content format, they're clearly
all how-tos. And seeing as the nature of
the topic would require a step-by-step
procedure, that's probably the route
you'd want to go to. And you can confirm
this by actually visiting some of the
top-ranking pages.
Now, with content angle, it appears as
though for beginners or basic seems to
be the right way to approach the topic.
The second example is for the query golf
clubs. Looking at the SERP, you'll see
that they're all e-commerce category
pages, which tells us that when people
search for this query, they're likely in
shopping mode.
Now, seeing as content format applies
mostly to blog posts and landing pages,
it wouldn't be applicable here since
we're looking at e-commerce category
pages.
As for content angle, it seems to be
mostly about deals, so saving money on
golf clubs.
All right, the final example is for
something like golf bags. Looking at the
SERP, you'll see something a bit
different. We have a mixed SERP. Content
type for the top-ranking page is an
e-commerce category page. Then we have a
couple of blog posts on the best golf
bags. And we also have an outlier on how
to buy golf bags.
And towards the bottom half of the
results, we have more e-commerce
category pages. So, what do you do?
Well, in order to make an educated
decision, we still need to lay some
foundation work. So, we'll revisit this
example in a later lesson.
Hey, it's Sam-O, and welcome to the
third lesson in our keyword research
module. In this lesson, I'm going to
show you how to find keywords for your
website based on the things you learn in
lesson one and two of this module. Let's
get started.
So, keyword research is the process of
finding keywords that people are
searching for in search engines. And the
general process can be divided into two
macro steps. Step one is to generate
keyword ideas, and step two is to
validate whether those keywords are
worth going after.
Now, this lesson is mostly about step
one, generating keyword ideas for your
website. And in order to do that, you
need a keyword research tool.
Keyword research tools show you
information on keywords like their
search volume, keyword difficulty
scores, and other SEO metrics. Plus,
they should help you discover potential
topics worth going after. There are a
lot of tools out there, and you're free
to use whichever ones you want. But for
this course, I'll be using Ahrefs
Keywords Explorer. Now, I also
understand that some people may not be
in a place to purchase SEO software
right now. If that's you, then we also
have a free tool called Ahrefs Keyword
Generator, which is a good place to
start. I'll leave links to both tools in
the description.
All right, so we're going to be doing
some keyword research for the rest of
this lesson. So, let's say that the
website we're doing keyword research for
is a golf blog. And the way this blog
generates revenue is through affiliate
commissions, meaning they promote other
people's products, and when someone
clicks on one of the links and makes a
purchase, you're compensated with a
commission.
So, the first step is to come up with a
list of seed keywords. And a seed
keyword is just a broad keyword related
to your niche. So, I'll go to Ahrefs
Keywords Explorer and add a few seeds
for our golf site. So, that might be
golf balls, golf clubs, and golf hats to
name a few.
Next, I'll go to the phrase match
report, which will show us keywords that
include any of these phrases.
And just like that, we have around
125,000
keyword ideas with search volumes and a
ton of other helpful metrics, some of
which we'll touch on later. Now, 125,000
keywords is just way too much to filter
through. So, before we continue, let's
take a second and revisit the five-point
checklist from the first lesson in this
module. Again, the five things we're
looking for when it comes to choosing
keywords are one, we want keywords that
have search demand. Two, keywords with
traffic potential.
Three, keywords with business potential.
Four, we need to be able to match search
intent. And five, we want to know how
hard it'll be to rank at the top of
Google for that keyword.
So, when we're generating keyword ideas,
we'll be able to check off the first
four points. As for the fifth, we'll
tackle that in the next lesson.
All right, let's look back at our list
of keyword ideas and start checking off
some of these boxes. So, first, we need
to find keywords that have search
demand. To do that, you can set a search
volume filter to show keywords with a
minimum volume of at least 300 monthly
searches.
And now that list has just shrunk to 351
keyword ideas, which will be easy to
manually filter through.
The next point on this checklist is to
see if they have traffic potential.
Again, traffic potential is a more
reliable metric than search volume,
because not all searches result in
clicks. And at the end of the day, we
want traffic, not searches.
To check the traffic potential of a
topic, you need to look at the top
ranking pages and see how much traffic
they're getting.
To do that, you can click on the SERP
button beside any of these keywords.
So, if we do that for the query golf
clubs, you'll see that the top page gets
around 16,000 monthly search visits from
the US.
Now, if you don't have an Ahrefs
account, you can get a free version of
the SERP using Ahrefs SERP Checker tool.
Next up is business potential. Again,
business potential is simply the value a
keyword has to your business. And while
16,000 monthly search visits seems
great, you need to consider the fourth
point on the checklist, which is to ask
yourself if you can match search intent.
As you can see, almost all of the top
ranking pages are e-commerce category
pages. So, searchers are probably in
shopping mode. But we have a golf
affiliate blog, so the site probably
isn't selling golf clubs, meaning we
can't create an e-commerce category
page, and therefore, we won't be able to
match search intent. So, seeing as this
query doesn't fulfill the points on our
checklist, we wouldn't go after this
keyword.
Now, looking further down the list,
you'll see the query best golf balls. It
has a high search volume, and if I click
on the SERP button, you'll see that the
traffic potential is around 5,000
monthly visits from the US. Pretty good.
Now, in terms of business potential,
this keyword would have a value of
three, because our site makes money by
reviewing and recommending products. So,
it would be super easy to organically
recommend products in a best of post,
which I assume would lead to a fair
amount of affiliate commissions.
As for search intent, these are blog
posts in the listical format with a
freshness content angle, as you can see
from the titles of the top ranking
pages.
So, this query checks all boxes and
passed our initial sniff test. So, I'll
click on the checkbox and add it to my
golf keyword list.
Now, checking the SERP for all of these
keywords would be pretty time-consuming.
So, there's a quick technique you can
use to find relevant keywords, and
that's to use keyword modifiers.
A modifier is an add-on to a base
keyword. For example, if our base
keyword is golf hats, we can modify this
keyword by adding best, top, or the
current year.
And modifiers tell us a lot about search
intent. A word like best, again, tells
us that a comparison needs to be made.
So, searchers are probably looking for
listical blog posts with various
different product recommendations.
Now, if a word like how or what is in
the keyword, then it tells us that the
top pages will likely be blog posts or
videos with step-by-step tutorials or
some other informational content. So,
with this knowledge, we can actually
filter this keyword list down to A,
keywords that likely have business
potential, and B, keywords where we can
match searcher intent.
For example, since we're doing keyword
research for an affiliate site,
modifiers like best, top, versus, and
review would likely bring up topics
where we can organically recommend
products.
So, if we go back to the keyword list,
we can click on the include filter and
paste this list there.
Next, I'll hit the any word tab, since
we want to find keywords that include
any of these modifiers, as well as one
of our seed keywords.
Hit apply, and we now have a list of
around 30 keywords that are most likely
going to have high business potential.
Plus, we know that 99% of the time, the
results for any best type keyword will
be listical blog posts. And we know that
we can match searcher intent with our
affiliate blog.
Now, if we switch the modifiers in the
include filter to words like how, what,
who, where, why, guide, and tutorial,
then we can apply the list to find
informational topics that we could write
about on our blog.
And pretty much all of these keywords
would be fair game for our hypothetical
golf blog.
Now, if you plan to use a list of
modifiers, then it's worth noting that
you should probably do it with much
broader seeds. For example, you'll see
that we only have 10 keywords when using
the search volume filter paired with our
list of informational modifiers.
Now, if I change the seed to just golf,
set the volume filter to a minimum of
300 monthly searches, and then paste in
my list of informational modifiers,
hit the any tab, and click apply,
then you'll see we have a lot more
topics that we could potentially create
content around. So, if this is a method
you want to try, then take a screenshot
of this list of modifiers, and feel free
to use them in your keyword research.
Now, after doing keyword research for
exactly 33 minutes and 14 seconds, I was
able to compile a list of over 190
keyword ideas in my golf keyword list.
Now, one downside to using keyword
research tools is that the list of
keyword ideas will usually be limited to
words and phrases that include your
seeds. But there are other great
keywords that won't necessarily include
your seeds. So, how do you find them?
Well, the best way to find these
keywords is to look at pages that drive
the most search traffic to your
competitor sites, because if your
competitors are ranking for keywords
that are sending them a ton of search
traffic, then I'm sure you'd want to get
in on the action, right?
Now, by competitor, I'm not necessarily
talking about your direct business
competitors. I'm referring to your
organic search competitors, which are
websites that rank for keywords that
you'd want to rank for.
So, to find these competitors, I'll go
back to Ahrefs Keywords Explorer, but
this time, I'll click on my golf keyword
list.
Next, I'll go to the traffic share by
domains report, which will show you the
websites that get the most search
traffic based on your keyword input, in
this case, our golf keyword list.
So, as you can see, sites like Golf
Digest, golf.com, and golfwrx are
getting the most search traffic from the
keywords that I want to hypothetically
rank for.
But we already know these keywords since
we created the list. So, what you can do
is click on the carrot beside a domain
you want to research further, and then
click top pages, which will show you the
pages that send the most search traffic
to a website. And check this out. Golf
Digest page on game improvement irons
gets around 5,400 monthly search visits
from the US.
This page that ranks for what degree is
a sandwedge gets around 4,700 monthly
search visits. And we wouldn't have seen
these in the keyword ideas report
because they don't contain our seeds.
So you can just skim through this list,
look for potential topics, then go
through those four points in the
checklist for keywords that are
interesting to you. Add them to your
keyword list, and once you've exhausted
a website's top pages, rinse and repeat
for the other organic search competitors
until you're satisfied with your list.
And if you're still unhappy with your
list, you can try and find other seeds
within this report. The two that stand
out to me right away are sandwedge and
fairway woods.
So I'll go back to Keywords Explorer and
type those into the search box.
And seeing as both of these are
different types of golf clubs, you can
add pitching wedge, putter, putting, and
so on and so forth.
Bottom line, there should be no shortage
of keyword ideas, and you should be able
to use these two methods to build a
solid list of topics to keep you busy
for years.
But here's the thing, even if you've
checked off these four boxes on the
checklist, there's still one left, and
it won't matter if you don't rank for
your keywords.
Hey, it's Ahrefs, and welcome to the
fourth lesson in our keyword research
module. Today, I'm going to show you how
to determine ranking difficulty for a
keyword. This will help you understand
how hard it'll be to rank high in Google
for your target keywords. Let's get
started.
So when it comes to ranking in Google,
you need to understand who you'll be up
against before you target a keyword.
Otherwise, you could be entering a
battle you won't be able to win. From an
SEO perspective, competitors are pages
and websites that rank at the top of
Google for your target keywords. So that
means your competitors can be different
for every single keyword you target. So
there are three main things you'll want
to consider before you decide to pick a
fight. And those are search intent,
metrics of the top ranking pages and
websites, and topical authority of the
top ranking websites.
Now, as we go through these points,
we're going to create a list of
self-check questions which should help
you make informed decisions in your
keyword targeting. Also, in order to see
things like metrics of top ranking
pages, you need an SEO tool since Google
won't show you data on other pages. So
I'll be using Ahrefs Keywords Explorer
throughout this lesson.
Now, if you don't have an Ahrefs
account, you can use our free SERP
Checker tool which will give you data on
the top three pages. All right, let's
start with search intent.
The first thing you need to do is look
at the SERP and ask yourself, do some of
the top ranking pages fail to closely
match search intent? To find this out,
you can go through the three C's of
search intent as we discussed in lesson
two of this module.
And by the looks of it, they're all
listical blog posts using the freshness
angle, so they do match it.
Also, pay close attention to the titles
and URLs of the ranking pages. In
general, if the top pages include the
primary keyword or a variation of it in
the title and or URL, they're likely
targeting that keyword.
For example, all of the top ranking
pages for the query how to save money
are exactly about that.
Whereas a query like best convertible
car seats for small cars is a bit mixed.
As you can see, some pages have gone
specifically with the angle for small
cars. As a result, it's probably
matching searcher intent better than the
more broad posts about the best
convertible car seats for any car.
This is a sign of weakness in the SERP
because it means there's probably a lack
of rank-worthy content out there about
the best convertible car seats for small
cars.
Now, I don't want you to take this as
advice that you must include the exact
keyword phrase in your titles and or
URLs. With this example, finding
convertible car seats for small cars is
actually a very specific need for a
specific person.
All right, let's talk about the metrics.
The first metric to look at is the
number of websites that are linking to
the page. At Ahrefs, we call this
referring domains.
As I mentioned in module one, backlinks
are one of Google's most prominent
ranking signals. So if a page has a lot
of quality links pointing at it, then
it'll be more competitive to rank.
So before choosing a keyword, you need
to ask yourself, can I get more quality
backlinks than the top ranking pages?
The second metric is website authority.
At Ahrefs, we call this domain rating,
which represents the overall strength of
a website's backlink profile.
Very generally speaking, you should be
going after keywords where your
website's DR is in a similar ballpark
range as the top ranking pages. Or at
the very least, one of the top ranking
pages should be in the same range as
your website.
For example, if all of the websites that
rank in the top 10 have high DRs, and
you have a DR of, let's say, 10, then
you may want to consider competing when
you're at a similar level. So let's add
that question to our checklist. Is my
website in a similar DR range or higher
than the top ranking websites?
Again, this is a very general
recommendation, but still a decent one
to follow if you're a beginner to SEO.
To see the domain rating of your own
site, you can enter your domain in Site
Explorer and see it here on the overview
page. Or you can enter your domain in
our free website authority checker. I'll
be leaving links to all of these tools
in the description.
All right, let's move on to the third
part, which is topical authority of the
top ranking websites.
Google wants to rank pages from
authoritative sources, and this goes
beyond backlinks. For example, if we
look at the SERP for how to unclog a
toilet, you'll see that this DR42 site
is outranking much more powerful
websites with significantly more
referring domains.
Well, this page comes from a website
that's just about plumbing, so it's
likely more authoritative on the topic.
So the question you need to ask yourself
is, is my website equally or more
topically authoritative than the top
ranking websites? If the answer is yes,
then that's a positive thing for you.
The easiest and quickest way to find out
is to just look at the domain names and
use some common sense. For example,
looking at the SERP for best convertible
car seat for small cars, you'll see
sites like Experienced Mommy, Baby
Center, Parenting Pod, Baby List, and
other relevant sites that talk about
products for children.
And for domains that aren't as easily
distinguishable like 800buckleup.org,
you can just visit the site, hit the
about page, and get a general idea of
what the site is about. In this case,
you'll see that they talk about car seat
recalls and review car seat brands. So
yes, it is topically authoritative on
car seats.
All right, let's look at our full list
of yes or no questions. As a very
general rule of thumb, the more yeses
you can check off, the better your
chances of ranking. Again, very general
because SEO is quite nuanced. With that
said, let's go through a couple of
hypothetical examples for our golf site.
To set the scene, let's say you have a
website that's about golf instruction,
and you also review golf equipment. And
your website's domain rating is low at
around 15.
All right, so the first example is for
the query best golf grips. Let's start
with the first question. Do some of the
top ranking pages fail to closely match
search intent?
From the looks of it, they all look
decent, so I'll check the no box.
Next up, can I get more quality
backlinks than the top ranking pages?
Again, we haven't covered anything about
quality backlinks yet, so for now, let's
just look at quantity. Most of the sites
have very few referring domains, so I'd
say this is a yes.
Next question. Is my website in a
similar DR range or higher than the top
ranking websites?
Based on the SERP, there are a few sites
with similar website authority, so let's
give this a yes as well.
And finally, is my website equally or
more topically authoritative than the
top ranking websites?
Well, all of the top pages are from golf
sites, and so is mine, so let's give
this a yes as well.
So based on our analysis, it looks like
this would be a topic worth going after.
All right, the next analysis is for the
keyword best putters.
Looking at search intent, overall, it
looks like the majority of pages are
good, so I'll check the no box. But I do
want to touch on this page on the best
blade putters.
This is more of a focused post, and
they're likely ranking high for this
because of all of the other factors like
high website authority, lots of
referring domains, and topical
authority. So I would actually exclude
them from the rest of this analysis.
All right, next up. Can I get more
quality backlinks than the top ranking
pages?
Again, just looking at the quantity of
links to these pages, the answer would
likely be a yes seeing as we're still
looking at about a dozen referring
domains. But it's important to realize
that getting more links than the number
one page probably won't happen in the
near future, meaning getting the top
ranking spot will be tough.
Next. Is my website in a similar DR
range or higher than the top ranking
websites? The answer is no.
And finally, my website is topically
authoritative, so I'll give this a yes.
Now, it looks like we're at a tie
between yeses and nos, and this is
exactly why I said, as a very general
rule of thumb, the more yeses you can
check off, the better your chances of
ranking.
Again, SEO is nuanced. Plus, you need to
weigh out some of the other principles
we discussed like traffic potential and
business value. And the best way to make
sound judgment calls is through
experience. So, it will take time to
hone your skills and gain a better grasp
of keyword analysis.
So, as you can see, understanding how
hard it'll be to rank in Google will be
a key skill to your success in search.
Why?
Because it's the first step to getting
predictable results. After all, if you
know what it'll take to rank ahead of
your competition, then it all comes down
to execution. And that's what the next
two modules are all about.
Hey, it's Sam Oh, and welcome to the
second module, which is about on-page
SEO. If you haven't seen the
introduction to SEO video and the module
on keyword research, then I highly
recommend watching those first. They'll
help you get the foundational knowledge
you'll need to get the most out of this
module. I'll leave links in the
description.
All right, so what is on-page SEO? It's
simply the practice of optimizing web
pages to rank higher in search engines.
And it revolves heavily around
optimizing pages for search intent. But,
on-page optimization also involve
creating and optimizing HTML tags like
titles and meta descriptions.
Now, if you've been exposed to the
practice of on-page SEO, then it's quite
likely that you've heard conflicting
advice. And for that reason, we're going
to discuss both what on-page SEO is and
what it is not. Let's talk about common
advice you might see on on-page SEO best
practices which just aren't true today.
And while there are many old-school
tactics that are still being
recommended, I want to focus on just
three points to help you navigate the
noise. Number one, on-page SEO is not
about stuffing exact match keywords.
It used to be common practice to include
the exact keyword you wanted to rank for
in your title, URL, and content.
For example, if you wanted to rank for
car dealer San Diego, you would stuff
that keyword throughout your page
despite the fact it doesn't make sense
grammatically speaking.
Google is smart enough to understand
things like connecting words, synonyms,
and closely related words and phrases.
In fact, for all of these queries, the
top 10 pages are nearly identical.
Unfortunately, stuffing exact match
keywords is still being practiced today,
which can lead to poor user experience
and poor readability. All things that
on-page SEO should not do.
The second thing is that on-page SEO is
not about using your keyword a specific
number of times on the page. In our
study of 3 million search queries, we
found that on average, the top ranking
page ranks for around a thousand other
relevant keywords in the top 10.
Now, can you imagine what it would be
like if a top ranking page had to
mention all 1,000 of those keywords at
least three times? It makes no sense.
The content would be unnecessarily
lengthy and create an awful user
experience for visitors. Here's an
example. Look at the SERP for the query
diet plan. You'll see that Healthline's
article on how to lose weight ranks
number one, and there's no mention of a
diet plan in their title or URL.
In fact, there's only one fleeting
mention of it on the page, not even a
subheading.
Here's another example. GQ ranks in the
top spot for classiest watch.
But, if we look at the page, you'll see
that the word classiest isn't there. And
neither is the word classy.
The third point is that on-page SEO
isn't about meeting a minimum word
count.
Some studies have shown that the average
content length of the top 10 results is
over 2,000 words. As a result, many SEOs
have recommended that you create pages
that are at least that length.
But, that isn't exactly sound advice.
For example, our backlink checker is 628
words, yet we rank number one for our
target keyword, and the page generates
around 130,000
monthly visits from Google search alone.
Here's another example. This page only
has 76 words on it. The majority of
content are images. According to Ahrefs
Site Explorer, the page gets over
170,000 monthly search visits.
Now, let's talk about what on-page SEO
is today in 2021 and beyond. Looking at
the definition again, on-page SEO is the
practice of optimizing web pages to rank
higher in search engines. And as I
mentioned, this revolves heavily around
optimizing pages for search intent. The
keyword here is search intent.
Translation, the goal of your pages
should be to satisfy the searcher's
intent. How?
Well, we talked about the three C's of
search intent, which should help you get
the basic stuff down like the content
type, format, and angle. In addition to
this, your content needs to address the
things people expect to see. You'll also
want to nail the more tangible items
like titles, subheadings, internal
linking, readability, and of course, the
actual content itself.
These are the things we'll be answering
in part two of our on-page SEO module,
where we'll get more tactical and talk
about how you can create content that's
optimized for search.
Hey, it's Sam Oh, and welcome to the
second lesson in the on-page SEO module.
Today, I'm going to show you how to
create a page that's optimized for
search. Let's get started. So, as I
showed you in the last lesson, on
average, the top ranking page ranks for
nearly a thousand keywords. For example,
Healthline's page is clearly targeting
the query how to lose weight fast, and
sure enough, they're ranking in the top
spot.
Now, the traffic to this page doesn't
come from just their target keyword. It
comes from the combined effect of
ranking for thousands of queries. And
when we sum up the traffic from all
keywords, it makes up well over 100,000
monthly search visits just from the US.
In fact, if we look at the page's
keyword rankings, you'll see that the
target query how to lose weight fast
only sends them a small percentage of
the total monthly search traffic.
Now, in order to rank for a ton of
keywords and get a ton of search
traffic, you need two things. The first
is a page that's optimized to rank, and
the second are backlinks. In this
lesson, we'll cover how to create an
optimized page, and we'll tackle links
in the next module.
Okay, so with on-page SEO, there are two
main things we need to cover. The first
is arguably the most important, and
that's to ensure your page satisfies
searcher intent. We've already covered
the three C's of search intent, which
again, will give you very basic guidance
on the type of content to create, the
format to use, and the angle to go with.
But, the actual content itself is what
will leave your visitors satisfied or
dissatisfied.
So, you might be wondering, what exactly
do I write about in order to satisfy
searchers? The short answer is to learn
from your competitors.
The top ranking pages are ranking at the
top for a reason. Google and other
search engines deem them as the best
candidates to satisfy a searcher's
query. So, they're clearly doing
something right, at least from the
perspective of a search engine.
Now, while the content will vary from
topic to topic, the way you research a
competitor's content will be more or
less the same. Let's go through an
example.
So, let's say that we want to create
content that targets the query best golf
club sets. To start, I'll go to Ahrefs
Keywords Explorer and search for the
query.
Then, I'll scroll down to the SERP
overview to see the top ranking pages.
Now, if you don't have an Ahrefs
account, you can use our free SERP
checker tool to do everything I'm about
to do.
All right, so looking at the SERP, we
want to pick out the top three or so
relevant ranking results. And by
relevant, I'm talking about pages that
match the dominant search intent based
on the three C's we've discussed so many
times now. So, in this case, the
majority of pages are blog posts in the
listical format with freshness as the
content angle. So, that means we
wouldn't look at pages from Amazon or
Golf Galaxy because these pages are
clearly e-commerce category pages and
are therefore outliers to the dominant
search intent.
We'll also exclude the pages from Golf
Digest and Business Insider since it
doesn't look like they're intentionally
targeting our query. So, I'll open up
these three pages in new tabs. And what
we're going to look for are similarities
in their content, specifically in the
subtopics. And we'll also look to deepen
our understanding of content format and
content angle.
Looking at the first page, you'll see
that they've created a list of
categories for the best golf club sets.
So, there's best selling, best game
improving irons, and so on.
Looking further down, they have a
subheading, which is the make and model
of the golf club set, followed by a
brief review of the clubs.
The next page also has a summary based
on more broad categories like best
value, premium pick, and best choice.
And based on the table of contents,
you'll see that they followed a similar
structure where the make and model of
the clubs are used as subheadings. They
also add a brief description of the
clubs as well as some skimmable bullet
points.
And the final page does pretty much the
same thing. They use subheadings as the
make and model, followed by a short
review.
Now, unless you're a golfer, you may not
have caught this minor, but perhaps
important detail.
All the pages talk about sets that would
appeal more to beginners.
For example, they all talk about
Callaway Strata set, and they all
include sets from Wilson Staff. In my
opinion, these wouldn't appeal to an
intermediate or advanced-level golfer.
All right, so at this point, we know
that we should create a listical blog
post with freshness as the angle. We
also know that the content should likely
be targeted at beginners. A couple
common sets that were mentioned in all
posts were the Callaway Strata's, as
well as a set from Wilson's Staff.
Now, it's important to note that you
don't have to include these in your
post, but it's simply an observation I
had made. We also saw that the top two
out of three pages had top picks for
categories like best game improvement
clubs, as well as best clubs for the
money.
Finally, we know that the subheading
should be the name of the club set.
Another thing I recommend before you
start writing is to do a content gap
analysis at the page level. A content
gap analysis at the page level will show
you common keywords that the top pages
are ranking for where your page isn't.
But, since we don't have a page, we can
still find common keyword rankings
amongst a few top-ranking pages using
Ahrefs content gap tool.
To get started, go to Ahrefs Site
Explorer and paste in any one of the
URLs.
Next, head on over to the content gap
tool.
Now, I'm going to take the three URLs we
analyzed and put them all in the top
section of this tool.
So, what this is saying is show us
keywords that any of these targets rank
for where at least one of them ranks in
the top 10.
Now, if I run the search, you'll be able
to see the keywords that these pages
rank for and the position that they're
ranking it. As a general rule of thumb,
the more URLs that rank high for the
keywords, the more relevant it'll be to
your content.
So, to narrow our search down a bit,
I'll click on the intersections
drop-down and select both two and three
intersections, meaning only show me
keywords where at least two of our
targets are ranking in Google and at
least one of those targets is ranking in
the top 10.
From here, just skim through the list
and look for interesting subtopics that
might be worth adding to your post. In
addition, you may be able to learn some
interesting things about the audience,
as well as the language they use. So, as
you can see, people who search for this
query are mostly looking for men's
clubs. People want to know the best
clubs for the money. They want to see
cheaper options, and others are looking
specifically for a set of irons. These
are all things you should consider as
you craft your content.
All right, so armed with this
information, you should be able to
create a great post with a searcher in
mind. And while the content is the most
important part, there are also a few
more technical on-page optimizations you
should do.
Let's go through a few of the most
important ones.
First is to include your target keyword
in your title when it makes sense.
Adding your target keyword to your title
should come naturally. For example, our
title for this post is 45 best free SEO
tools, tried and tested. And free SEO
tools is our target keyword.
Now, there will be times when it makes
more sense to use a close variant of
your target keyword. For example, this
post is targeting the query how to get
YouTube subscribers, but our title is
nine ways to get more YouTube
subscribers because we went for the
listical angle.
The next thing you can do is to use a
short and descriptive URL slug.
Short and descriptive URLs help people
immediately understand what the page is
about before even visiting them. Just
look at these two URLs. They're on the
exact same topic, but one is much more
descriptive than the other.
This part of the URL is called the slug,
and the easiest way to choose your slug
is to use your target keyword where
spaces will be replaced with hyphens.
Again, you should only do this when it
makes sense, so you don't need to worry
about forcing it. Now, if you're
wondering if you should use subfolders
to describe categories, that's entirely
up to you.
All right, next is the meta description.
The meta description is HTML code that's
meant to briefly summarize your page,
and search engines often use this text
right within the serp. To my best
knowledge, meta descriptions aren't used
as a ranking signal, but they can
influence click-through rates, and for
that reason, I think it's important to
add to your pages.
Now, it's important to note that
according to our study of 192,000 pages,
we found that Google rewrote meta
descriptions nearly 63% of the time. So,
I wouldn't spend a ton of time on them,
but you should still include them.
All right, next up is to add internal
links to and from your pages. Internal
links are links from one page on the
same domain to another, and they're
super powerful because they can pass
link authority to other relevant pages,
and they also help search engines better
understand a page's contents. For
example, if I had a site in the careers
niche and I was writing a post about how
to write a cover letter, then I
definitely want to add internal links
from other relevant pages like one on
how to write a resume.
More importantly, visitors who want to
learn how to write a resume would
probably want to know how to write a
cover letter and vice versa.
To find opportunities, you can go to
Google and search for
site:yourdomain.com
and then add the topic you're writing
about.
Then visit relevant pages and see if
there's an opportunity to add an
internal link to your new post.
Alternatively, you can use Ahrefs Site
Audit tool completely free. Just sign up
for an Ahrefs Webmaster Tools account,
verify your site, and then run a crawl.
Then you can head over to Link Explorer
to find internal linking opportunities.
We have a short but helpful video on how
to do this on Ahrefs Product Updates
YouTube channel, so I'll link that video
up in the description.
All right, next up is to optimize your
images. In the last 28 days, we've had
over 4,000 visits to our blog from
Google Image Search. While that pales in
comparison to our 500,000 monthly
organic blog visits, it's still 4,000
visits.
Now, optimizing your images for SEO is
threefold. Number one, name your image
files appropriately.
For example, this is a picture of a
puppy. If you took the photo yourself,
then chances are your smartphone or
camera named it something like img_
and then a million numbers. Instead,
change the file name to something like
puppy.
Not exactly rocket science, but
according to Google, file names can give
Google clues about the subject matter of
the image.
Number two, use descriptive alt text.
Alt text, short for alternative text, is
an HTML attribute that goes in your
image tag.
So, the syntax would look something like
this, where the alt value should
describe the image.
Alt text helps improve accessibility for
those who are using screen readers, or
if the image fails to load, visitors
will be shown the alt text instead.
Now, Google recommends creating useful,
information-rich content that uses
keywords appropriately and is in context
of the content of the page. Yes, Google
explicitly says to use keywords, but
they also say to avoid stuffing keywords
as it results in a negative user
experience and may cause your site to be
seen as spam. Meaning, don't do
something like this.
Now, looking back at the syntax, our alt
text isn't exactly descriptive. So,
let's change that to something like
puppy sitting on a couch.
If you use WordPress, just add your alt
text here when inserting your images,
and the CMS should do the rest.
All right, the third thing you'll want
to do is compress your images.
Compressing images makes your image file
sizes smaller, leading to faster load
times, and page speed is a Google
ranking signal.
There's a free tool for compressing
images called ShortPixel, which has both
a web interface as well as a WordPress
plugin.
And the last thing I highly recommend is
to optimize for readability. Here are
five simple but effective tips you can
use to improve readability. Number one,
write in short sentences and short
paragraphs because no one wants to land
on a page with a huge wall of text. Two,
use descriptive subheadings so people
who are skimming the article can easily
find the things that are important to
them.
Three, use a large enough font that's
easily readable on both desktop and
mobile.
Four, avoid using big words. It's more
important that people understand your
content. And five, write as you speak.
Your content will be more conversational
and entertaining to read.
A free tool I recommend using is called
Hemingway app. It'll give you some
writing tips, as well as a readability
grade. I'd recommend trying to keep
things at or below a sixth-grade level.
Now, there are other on-page
optimizations you can do like adding
open graph meta tags, or OG tags for
short. These will allow you to customize
the titles, descriptions, images, and
other information when your pages are
shared on social media networks.
There's also schema markup, which is
code that helps search engines
understand your content and better
represent it in the search results. For
example, these pages use the recipe
schema type, so Google is able to show
things like the recipe's rating, the
number of votes, the total time to make
the food, as well as nutritional
information.
If you have a WordPress site, then you
can add OG tags and schema with plugins
like Rank Math or Yoast.
Now, again, the most important part of
your content is that you're striving to
satisfy searcher intent. Yes, the
technical things are important, too, but
they're more like the icing on the cake.
So, here's a full on-page SEO checklist.
Take a screenshot and let's move on to
the next module, which is on an SEO
strategy called link building.
Hey, it's Sam Oh and welcome to the
third module in our SEO course for
beginners. Throughout the next five
lessons, we'll be talking about arguably
the most important and most challenging
SEO strategy. It's called link building.
And to kick things off, we're going to
talk about what it is, why it's
important, and the mindset you'll need
to have to be successful at it. Let's
get started.
So, what is link building? By
definition, link building is the process
of getting other websites to link to a
page on your website. And these
hyperlinks are called backlinks. Now,
while the end result might make sense
conceptually and seem simple, the part
that most people don't understand and
can't seem to get right is this, the
process. And this ultimately boils down
to emailing complete strangers and
asking them to link to you. Now, let's
take a quick second to talk about how
strange and kind of awkward this might
sound. So, let's go through a few
scenarios and then we'll revisit this
definition of link building.
Let's say that you have a marketing blog
and you write about SEO and digital
marketing. Now, if some random person,
let's call her Sally, sends you an email
and said, "Hey, can you link to my post
on Facebook ads? It's really good."
Would you link to her?
Probably not. In fact, you probably
wouldn't even reply or click the link in
her email to actually check and see if
her content is as good as she claims.
Now, let's flip the script a bit. Let's
say that you've been following Ahrefs
YouTube channel and blog for some time.
You've implemented some of the
strategies we've shared and gotten some
great results for your site. On top of
that, you've been using our SEO tools
for 3 years. Now, an email pops up in
your inbox from me, Sam Oh. A name and
face you might recognize because you've
been following our channel. And in that
email, I've asked you to link to our
free backlink checker from your page
that lists the 15 best free SEO tools.
Would you link to me?
Maybe.
Now, the final scenario. Let's say your
mentor, who helped you get started in
digital marketing, sends you an email.
And she asked you to link to a page on
her site from a relevant page on yours.
Would you link to her?
Definitely. She helped you get started
in digital marketing. You obviously
trust and respect her, and you'd be
willing to bend over backwards for her.
The point of these scenarios is to show
you that the process of link building is
actually very relational and can
sometimes take more time than you might
like.
With Sally, you don't know her. You
don't owe her anything. You don't trust
her. She's blindly coming in, almost
invading your inbox, and asking you for
a favor without offering any kind of
value in return.
In the second scenario, when I
hypothetically emailed you, you knew who
I was, I had indirectly helped you, and
you were a user of our product for
years. So, while we may not have a
real-life relationship, we're still
connected in some way. So, the chances
of linking to me are probably higher
than linking to Sally.
Now, when your mentor asked you for a
link, there's a real relationship there.
There's a sense of trust, respect, and
gratitude. So, of course you would link
to her.
Now, while you can't and shouldn't try
to become friends with everyone just to
get links, you'll find that your best
links will usually come from
relationships that are sparked from
email outreach. So, let's redefine link
building and set the tone for the rest
of this module.
Link building is the process of building
relationships with other relevant site
owners who want and will link to your
content because it enhances theirs.
So, this definition isn't just about you
getting something. It includes
relationships, relevance, and a value
exchange. All things we'll touch on
later in this module.
Now, since effective link building is
tough, you need to understand why it's
worth the effort. In short, backlinks
are used by search engines like Google
to help rank web pages. And it's been
this way since 1998 when Google created
PageRank.
PageRank is a mathematical formula that
judges the value of a page by looking at
the quantity and quality of other pages
that link to it. And Google confirms the
importance of backlinks on their how
search works page. Under their ranking
useful pages heading, they state, "If
other prominent websites on the subject
link to the page, that's a good sign
that the information is of high
quality."
We also found a clear correlation
between organic traffic and backlinks
from unique websites in our study of
over 1 billion web pages.
So, while getting backlinks may be
harder than, let's say, creating a blog
post, they're absolutely critical if you
want to rank for competitive phrases.
And competitive phrases are usually the
ones that will drive the most traffic
and revenue for your business. Now, we
briefly touched on the main way of
getting backlinks, but not all links can
or will be obtained through outreach.
So, in the next lesson, we'll talk about
three methods to get backlinks, as well
as the level of difficulty and
effectiveness.
Hey, it's Sam Oh and welcome to the
second lesson in our link building
module. In this lesson, we'll talk about
three link building strategies to get
backlinks. Now, before we get started,
it's important to set the expectations
right for this lesson and talk about the
difference between a strategy and a
tactic. To me, strategies are higher
level in the sense that it outlines the
scope of the plans, whereas tactics are
more micro and often focused around
smaller steps.
So, the strategy sets you in the right
direction and the tactics kind of define
how you get there. And we'll get into a
few link building tactics later on in
this module. All right. So, when it
comes to link building, there are three
main strategies to get backlinks. You
can create them, buy them, or earn them.
Let's talk about what each method looks
like, their level of difficulty, and
effectiveness. The first method is to
create backlinks. Creating backlinks
means to manually add links on one
domain back to yours. This can be done
by adding your website to directories,
leaving comments on blog posts, or
adding your website's URL to your social
media profile. Anyone can do this with
minimal effort. So, like almost all easy
things in life, they're generally not
that effective from an SEO and ranking
perspective.
Now, buying backlinks is exactly as it
sounds. You pay webmasters or authors a
fee and in return, they'll link back to
a page on your site. Now, this is
against Google's webmaster guidelines
and can potentially result in a penalty.
That might be anything from losing
ranking positions or even worse, getting
your pages removed from Google search
index.
Also, buying links isn't exactly cheap.
We contacted 250 websites to ask if they
sell links and we found that the average
cost of buying one was nearly $353.
And of course, we didn't buy any.
In terms of level of ease, if you have
the money, it's super easy to do because
it's just a transaction. Now, in terms
of the effectiveness, I would think that
they're highly effective unless or until
you get caught. And in my opinion, the
risk isn't worth the reward, especially
if you want to build a business that
will stand the test of time.
The final way to get backlinks is to
earn them. And there are three common
ways you can do this. The first and most
common are links that are earned through
email outreach. This is when you email
other website owners and editors and ask
them to link to you.
Another way to earn backlinks is by
becoming a source for an online
publication or media outlet. For
example, if a journalist references you
in an article, they'll often link to you
and or your social media profiles.
And the final way is to earn backlinks
organically. For example, if someone
visits your page from a link on social
media, organic search, word of mouth, or
wherever and decides to link to you,
then that's an earned link.
Now, even though 100% organic links may
sound like the best way to get them, I
don't want you to bank on that. These
kinds of links are typically less
consistent unless you're an extremely
well-known brand with extremely
well-crafted content and you're already
getting significant exposure. It takes
time to build a reputation that's
well-trusted and for those organic links
to come in on a regular basis. And if
you're just hoping and waiting, you'll
likely fall behind because your
competitors will actually be busy
building links by reaching out to other
website owners. Generally speaking, the
harder it is to obtain a link, the more
valuable it'll be. And for that reason,
we'll be focusing on streamlined tactics
so that you can build a steady stream of
backlinks to your page and get more
traffic from SEO.
Now, not all links are created equal.
Some will propel your pages to the top
of Google, while others can actually
hurt your site. So, what makes a link
actually good?
That's what we'll be talking about in
the next lesson.
Hey, it's Sam Oh and welcome to the
third lesson in the link building
module. Today, we're going to talk about
the attributes that make a backlink good
or high quality.
As I said in the last lesson, not all
backlinks are created equal. For
example, if you spammed forums with
links to your site, those wouldn't and
shouldn't hold more weight than, let's
say, a link from the New York Times.
Otherwise, backlinks would just be a
game of quantity and Google search
results would reward the biggest
spammers. Fortunately, ranking on Google
doesn't work that way and quality
backlinks are still a prominent ranking
signal. So, with that said, let's talk
about the five attributes that make a
backlink good. The first attribute is
relevance. Imagine this for a second.
You're going to visit Greece for the
first time next month and you need
recommendations for places worth going
to.
Now, you have a friend that lived in
Greece for their entire life and
obviously knows every nook and cranny.
You also have a friend in the US who
hates traveling and has never been
outside of the states. Whose opinion
would you hold higher?
Obviously, your Greek friend. In the
same way, links from a website about
travel or Greece would hold more weight
than links from sites about technology
or marketing because they're more
topically relevant and authoritative.
For example, you'll see that this page
is ranking number one for the query,
"How to devein shrimp?" If we look at
their backlinks and also filter by one
link per domain, we can see their
backlinks from different websites.
Now, if you don't have an Ahrefs
account, then you can still see
backlinks pointing at pages using our
free backlink checker tool, which I'll
leave a link to in the description.
Going back to the backlinks report,
you'll see this page from wikiHow, which
is called "Three Ways to Peel and Devein
Shrimp." So, that link is on a very
relevant page.
Scrolling down a bit, you'll see this
link from a page called "Shrimp with
Garlic Sauce," which again is relevant
at the page level. But, you can also see
that it's relevant at the domain level,
too, just by looking at the domain name,
slimpalate.com.
Both of these links are great from a
relevant standpoint, whereas a link like
this one isn't very relevant at all. The
page is about Firefox 3.5, which is a
web browser. It comes from a site about
video games and computer hardware. So,
an ideal link would be contextually
placed within the body of the content
where someone is quite literally
recommending or referencing you.
All right, the next quality of good
quality links is authoritativeness.
If you're unfamiliar with authority in
the context of backlinks, it basically
represents the so-called link power a
web page has. And this relates to how
Google PageRank works. As we discussed
before, both the quantity and quality of
links matter. So, the more quality links
a page gets, the more PageRank it earns.
And the more PageRank it has, the more
authority it can pass to other pages
through hyperlinks.
For example, let's say that page C has
two links, one from page A and one from
page B.
Page A is stronger than page B and also
has fewer outgoing links. Feed this
information into the PageRank algorithm
and you get the PageRank of page C.
Now, this is obviously a simplified
version of how PageRank works, but the
key point here is that getting links
from high authority pages will likely
have the greatest impact on your
rankings.
Now, while Google doesn't provide
PageRank or website authority scores, we
have two metrics at Ahrefs that try to
quantify it. Domain rating is our
website authority metric and it
represents the overall strength of a
website's backlink profile.
And URL rating is our page level
authority metric, which represents the
overall strength of a page's backlink
profile. And you'll find both of these
metrics throughout most of our tools,
giving you insights on referring pages.
Now, we've covered two very important
parts of good quality backlinks, but
what we haven't talked about yet is the
actual link itself. So, let's break down
the anatomy of a hyperlink and talk
about how the different parts relate to
SEO.
Here's what a link looks like to your
website visitors. And if we look at the
HTML code, then it would look like this.
Now, there are three basic parts to a
link that matter in SEO. The destination
URL, anchor text, and the rel attribute
or lack of one.
The destination URL is simply the URL
the person will visit when the link is
clicked. The second part of a link is
the anchor text. The anchor text is the
clickable word, phrase, or image
attached to the link. So, in our
example, Site Explorer is the anchor
text, which is the name of our
competitor analysis tool.
Google uses anchor text to better
understand what a page is about and what
terms it should rank for. But, building
lots of links with keyword-rich anchors
is an example of a link scheme and may
result in a Google penalty as it looks
unnatural. For example, if you had a
post on the best golf balls and had a
hundred links pointing to it where the
anchor text were all best golf balls,
then it would look and be quite
unnatural.
People often use anchors such as the
company's brand name, the title of the
page, the URL, or phrases like click
here. And here's some proof. If we look
at the anchors of backlinks pointing to
our data study on featured snippets,
you'll see varying anchor text like
Ahrefs, old studies, Ahrefs study,
research, and even specific stats like
12.3% of search queries, and 99.58%,
and so on. In fact, there are only 16
websites that have linked to us using
the anchor text "featured snippet." With
most earned links, you have very little
or no control over the anchor text. So,
over-optimization isn't something you
really need to worry about.
And the last part of the link we'll talk
about is the rel attribute. Some links
contain a rel attribute, which is
intended to tell crawlers about the
relationship between the linking page
and the linked page. And the three rel
values that you should know about when
it comes to link building are nofollow,
UGC, and sponsored.
Historically, nofollow links told Google
that the linking page would rather not
associate themselves with the linked
page. And for that reason, Google didn't
transfer authority through those links.
But then, Google added a couple other
rel values, UGC, which stands for
user-generated content, and sponsored,
which signifies an ethical paid link.
They also announced that going forward,
they would look at these link attributes
as hints, meaning they may pass value
through them at their discretion.
Now, if a link doesn't have any of these
rel values, then it would be called a
followed link, meaning the link can pass
PageRank and help boost your rankings.
Seeing as this is still relatively new,
I'd recommend focusing on building
followed links, although that's only
partially within your control. Now, it's
important to note that nofollow and UGC
links aren't bad. It's just that
followed links are proven to pass
authority.
One final thing I want to touch on is
link placement. Prominent links are more
likely to be clicked, and it's believed
that Google takes this into account when
determining how much authority a link
transfers.
For instance, an editorial link is more
likely to be clicked than a link in the
footer. So, all else being equal, the
former would be better than the latter.
So, to summarize, an ideal link would
come from a relevant and authoritative
page where the link is followed. It
would have a descriptive anchor and be
placed contextually within editorial
content. But, the truth is a lot of this
is out of your control. What is in your
control is how you spend your time
building links. By using these five
attributes to help qualify prospects or
people that are worth contacting, you'll
spend your time building links that will
actually move the needle.
Now, the easiest way for a beginner to
start building links is to use tried and
tested tactics. And we'll be covering a
few of them in the next lesson.
Hey, it's Ammo and welcome to the fourth
lesson in the link building module.
Today, we're going to talk about the
step-by-step process to build backlinks
as well as three cookie-cutter link
building tactics that are tried, tested,
and completely beginner-friendly. Let's
get started with the general process to
link building. There are three general
stages in link building: prospecting,
vetting, and email outreach. When
prospecting, you're searching for
relevant pages and websites that might
link to you. These might be people who
are linking to a similar page as the one
you're going to create, those who have
influence in your industry, or people
who are passionate about the topic.
The main goal isn't to find a perfect
list of people. This stage is about
finding as many people as possible that
fit a specific set of criteria. And this
criteria is usually dictated by link
authority metrics as well as relevance.
As a result, you'll usually be working
with large and very unperfect sets of
data.
The vetting stage is where you start to
refine your list of prospects. These are
the people that you'll be contacting.
So, you'll need to visit their websites
and validate that they are indeed people
worth contacting.
Finally is the email outreach stage.
This is when you finalize your pitches
and start emailing your vetted
prospects.
Now, depending on the link building
tactic you use, the way you prospect,
vet, and craft your email pitches will
differ. And this is actually quite
difficult when you're new to link
building.
Fortunately, there are a few dead simple
but super effective link building
tactics that are completely
newbie-friendly. But, before we can get
tactical, let's revisit our definition
of link building because there are three
main parts in it that will help you with
prospecting, vetting, and email
outreach. Again, link building is the
process of building relationships with
other relevant site owners who want and
will link to your content because it
enhances theirs. Now, I want to
highlight the three main parts from this
definition:
relationships, relevance, and a value
exchange. We already talked about the
relevance part in the last lesson. Now,
we're talking about mainly the value
exchange and what that looks like in
some common link building tactics.
So, let's dig into a few easy link
building tactics and I'll show you what
each stage of the link building process
looks like in detail. Plus, I'll outline
the value exchange for each tactic to
give you a better idea of what I mean.
All right, the first link building
tactic is to get free PR using HARO.
HARO, or Help A Reporter Out, is a free
service that connects journalists with
sources and sources with journalists.
You sign up as a source and select the
categories where you're qualified to
answer questions. You'll then get emails
from journalists from various media
outlets looking for sources on specific
topics. And these aren't just your
run-of-the-mill publications. In just
this single email, you'll see
publications like parents.com,
POPSUGAR, and the Houston Chronicle, to
name a few.
Just skim through the topics, and if you
find something where you can add value,
respond to the journalist with your
expert opinion. And if they use you as a
source, they'll usually link back to
your site and social media profiles.
Now, the value exchange here is simple.
You're exchanging your expert knowledge
for a mention and usually a link from an
authoritative site. From my personal
experience, I've gotten links from
places like Reader's Digest, Inc.
Magazine, Forbes, and The Huffington
Post to name a few.
Now, looking at the three stages of link
building, the prospecting part is as
easy as it gets. You sign up for a free
service and journalists are actually
looking for your help, not the other way
around, which makes HARO super
beginner-friendly.
As for vetting, you can simply scan
through the results on a daily basis,
but that can be time-consuming. A simple
tip you can use is to create a Gmail
filter so only relevant emails will
surface in your inbox. Just log in to
Gmail and click on the carrot to bring
down the search options.
Next, set the from field to
haro@helpareporter.com.
Then, you'll want to set the subject to
HARO within square brackets, since all
of their emails include that in the
subject line. Finally, set the has the
words field to any keywords you want to
monitor. And you can also use the or
search operator to include multiple
keywords or phrases.
Click search to see the results your
search filters would include and check
out some of the emails to ensure you're
getting relevant results. If everything
looks good, click on the carrot again
and then click create filter.
You'll then have the options to apply
labels, mark it as important, or forward
it to another team member to take care
of.
Now, as for the email outreach part,
HARO gives you an email address, which
will then be forwarded to the
journalist. So, just respond to the
given email address and write your
response.
Now, obviously, you're not going to be
the only person emailing the journalist.
So, here are a few tips you can use to
improve your hit rate. Number one, keep
your emails as short as needed.
Journalists get tons of emails, and if
they see a huge wall of text, they
probably won't even give your response a
chance.
Number two, go after topics where
journalists are likely looking for
multiple sources. For example, this
query from Best Life is seeking medical
experts, as in the plural form of
expert. These kinds of requests will
usually be your typical listical-style
posts. So, the more responses they
accept, the higher your chances of
getting mentioned and linked to. Number
three, respond as quickly as possible.
Journalists on HARO will often give a
tighter deadline to give themselves time
to actually put together a good story.
Plus, some journalists believe that
people who respond faster are better
sources. Don't believe me? Here's what a
journalist from Reader's Digest said to
me.
The deadline was just to make sure I get
people to respond in a timely manner. I
actually have the rest of the month put
the story together, which is nice. I
find the tighter the deadline I attach,
the better the responses, because the
only people who go to the effort are
ones who really have something relevant
to offer. Obviously, this doesn't apply
to every journalist, but it kind of
makes sense.
All right, tip four is to prioritize
questions where you are an expert and
use it as the first line in your pitch.
There'll be days where you can't respond
to every relevant request. So,
prioritize the ones where you have the
highest probability of getting sourced.
For example, PopSugar is looking for
experts who can talk about why cats
scratch furniture and how to stop them
from doing it. If you're a vet, then you
might start your email with something
like, "Hi Jenna, my name is Sam O and
I'm a veterinarian with 12 years
experience and a board member of the Cat
Alliance."
Clearly, I'm not a vet, but you get my
point. When you immediately qualify
yourself as the right person to answer
the question, you'll likely get their
attention. Of course, you should be 100%
honest, so I wouldn't claim to be a vet
when I'm not. And finally, follow all
directions in their query. For example,
this one says, "Please be sure to
include your full name, pronouns, title,
and credentials, and the website you'd
like linked with your name."
All right, the next link building tactic
is guest posting or guest blogging, same
thing.
Guest blogging is when you create
content for another website. And the
reason why this strategy works is
because there's a clear value exchange.
They get great content for free and
almost always, they allow you to link
back to your site, whether that be
within the content or in the author bio.
Now, guest blogging also provides
another great benefit aside from a
potential backlink. You get the
opportunity to get exposure to someone
else's audience. They've already done
the hard work in building that audience.
You just have to write something that'll
impress their readers.
Now, when you're prospecting, you'll
need to get a list of websites, and
there are a few ways you can do that.
The first way is to use Google search
operators. Just go to Google and search
for something like in title:
write for us wrapped in quotes, and then
a keyword that's related to your niche.
In this case, this search query will
show us pages that include the phrase
write for us in the title and have the
word golf balls somewhere on the page.
And this is a common footprint that
websites use to attract guest writers.
Now, because you'll want to write for
sites with some kind of link authority,
you can use Ahrefs SEO toolbar to see
link authority metrics right within
Google search results. And if you don't
have an Ahrefs account, you can use our
free website authority checker to see
the domain ratings for these sites.
Another way to find a list of sites fast
is to use Ahrefs Content Explorer.
Content Explorer is a searchable
database where you can find pages on any
topic along with both social and SEO
metrics. To get started, just enter a
topic that's related to your niche and
run the search.
Next, you'll want to set some filters to
ensure that A, you're getting relevant
results, and B, that you're reaching out
to websites that have some kind of link
authority.
So, first, I'll set the language filter
to English, since that's the only
language I'll be able to write in.
Then, I'll set a domain rating filter
and set it to a range like 30 to 60.
Now, if this is your first time guest
blogging, then you may want to set a
lower range like 10 to 30 to get
practice before pitching more
authoritative sites. Or if you're a
season guest blogger, then you can try
something like 40 to 70.
All right, so next, I'll enable this
filter, one page per domain, which will
narrow our results to one page per
website. And this is almost a must-do
kind of thing, because there's no point
in pitching the same website numerous
times.
Now, with around 200,000 domains, you
might be wondering which ones allow
guest posts. The truth is, you won't
know until you ask. But there's a way to
improve your hit rate, and that's to
look at websites that have previously
accepted guest authors. To find those
sites, just click on the websites tab
and make sure that your results are
sorted by the number of authors.
Basically, the more authors you see, the
more probable it is that they accept
guest posts.
Either that or they have a big staff of
writers.
From here, you can export the results
and then move on to the vetting stage.
At this point, you'll want to do a quick
check to make sure that the websites
don't look spammy and that they're
actually relevant to your site.
For example, golfballs.com is clearly
going to be relevant and it's not spammy
at all, seeing as it's just a regular
e-commerce site.
As for metricscat.com,
the domain doesn't look like it's about
golf. And if you visit the site, you'll
see that it looks like a software
company. So, we'd exclude this domain
from our outreach list.
Now, another thing worth checking is the
domain's site-wide organic traffic.
To do that, go to Site Explorer and
search for the domain.
Next, click on the organic search tab.
If the site is getting consistent search
traffic like this, then it's a good sign
that the domain is in good standing with
Google. Domains that have an organic
traffic like this is probably something
you'd want to exclude when vetting
sites. Reason being, this huge decline
in search traffic is telling us that
Google may have penalized the website.
So, you probably wouldn't want to
associate your domain with theirs. Now,
when you're vetting, you'll likely want
to find around 10 times the number of
posts you can write in a week. For
example, if you can write two posts per
week, then try and find 20 vetted sites.
Reason being, most people won't accept
your post, let alone respond to you. All
right, let's move on to the next stage,
which is email outreach. Now, when
you're pitching websites for a guest
post, ideally, you want to come up with
a good reason as to why they should
accept your post.
Free content is great and all, but it's
not necessarily so convincing that
everyone will accept it. So, take some
time to do your research on the site.
See how your expertise can be helpful
for their audience or business. For
example, if we look at the blog for
golfballs.com,
you'll see that they have content on the
best golf balls for kids.
And after searching through their site,
I found that they have another guide on
the best golf balls for the longest
distance. Now, they're missing out on a
lot of these best golf balls for blank.
And seeing as they're in the business of
selling golf balls, I could easily pitch
them topics on something like best golf
balls for high handicappers, which
according to Ahrefs Keywords Explorer,
gets searched around 800 times per month
globally. So, I might send them an email
and say something like, "Hey, whatever
the editor's name is, I was digging
through your site and saw that you have
a couple of posts on the best golf balls
for kids and for distance, but I was
pretty surprised to see that you don't
have one for other types of players,
i.e., seniors. Being a high handicapper
myself, I spent hundreds of dollars on
balls and countless hours on launch
monitors to find the best ball for me.
If you're open, I'd love to write a post
for you about how to find the best golf
balls for hacky golfers like myself. I'm
happy to share all the data and stats,
which I think will help people make an
informed decision as they shop through
your store. Is that something you'd be
open to? Cheers, Sam.
Now, with this outreach email, I'm
showing them that I've done my research
on their site. I'm a golfer myself. I
have some unique data, which I spent
time and money to get, and I'm also
showing them how my post could help them
get more sales. We'll talk quite a bit
about outreach in the next lesson, so
let's move on to the final tactic, which
is the skyscraper technique. The
skyscraper technique is a link building
tactic where you find content that has a
lot of links, create your own version on
the topic, but improve on it, and then
reach out to those linking to the
popular post, and ask them to link to
yours.
Now, if we were to go through the
prospecting, vetting, and outreach
stages, this lesson would be extended
another 7 to 8 minutes. So, instead,
I'll link up a video which will take you
through the entire process step-by-step.
In fact, we have an entire playlist
dedicated to link building tactics,
strategies, and processes. So, I highly
recommend watching that, too.
Now, prospecting and vetting are pretty
straightforward, but the hardest part of
link building, and the part that makes
link building challenging, is outreach.
So, the next lesson is dedicated to
crafting highly effective outreach
emails.
Hey, it's Sam Oh, and welcome to the
final lesson in our link building
module. Today, we're going to cover how
to do blogger outreach that leads to
backlinks. And this may very well be the
most important lesson in this entire
module, because nearly all link building
tactics require some sort of email
exchange. So, today, we'll cover the
primary objectives of blogger outreach,
two common approaches, and I'll break
down the anatomy of a good quality
outreach email. Let's get started. So,
the primary objective of blogger
outreach is to convince those with large
targeted audiences to talk about you.
And from the perspective of an SEO, you
want them to link to your website. Now,
outreach doesn't mean broadcasting,
meaning you shouldn't be sending every
single person the exact same email, like
you would through email marketing. For
example, this outreach email that I got
is what typical blogger outreach looks
like today.
First of all, I can see that they didn't
even take a second to check what my name
is when literally 2/3 of all pages on my
personal site have my full name on them.
Instead, they stuck with a generic
"there", used it in a mass mailing
software, and broadcasted it out to
hundreds, maybe even thousands of
people. But the name thing isn't that
big of a deal.
Second, this is clearly a generic
templated email with zero consideration
for the recipients. The person says,
"I'm writing because I saw your post
here." Then they didn't even take a
second to proofread the email, and their
justification for me to link to them is
because it fits well in my post. On top
of that, the person followed up with me
three more times with nearly the exact
same email, all sent within the same
30-minute period.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is called
spam. And the results of these kinds of
emails lead to nothing. The page the
person wanted me to link to got a total
of two backlinks, and both of them are
irrelevant and look like they've been
paid for. And those backlinks aren't
moving the needle since the page gets
zero organic search visits. These kinds
of emails, along with hundreds of others
in my inbox, are prime examples of why
you need to write good quality emails.
Otherwise, you'll just blend in with the
rest of the spam people get on a daily
basis. After all, these are unsolicited
emails. Now, to be clear, it doesn't
mean that you can't use some sort of
template to send a lot of emails
efficiently. For example, I literally
just got this email in my inbox, and it
says, "Hey Sam, I just published a
roundup post about the best personal
blogs to read, and I featured you in
it." And that's a link to his post. Then
he explicitly says, "But I'm not looking
for a share or anything like that. I
just wanted to say thank you for all the
inspiration you've brought to the
blogosphere and digital marketing world.
Best of luck in your endeavors, and keep
up the good work on Ahrefs' YouTube
channel."
This email didn't come to my Ahrefs'
email account. It came to the one on my
personal site. So, he clearly did a bit
of digging before sending the email, and
I'm sure he sent a similar message to
all 117 people he featured. So, you
might be thinking, "What's the point of
this email if he's not asking for
anything?" We'll get to that later in
this lesson. Now, the first email that I
just showed you is one of the common
approaches to blogger outreach. It's
called the shotgun approach, where you
build a broad list of targets, load them
up into an outreach tool, and then blast
out emails to anyone and everyone.
The opposite approach to this is the
sniper method. This is when you choose
targets carefully based on a tight set
of criteria, and then send personalized
emails. Of the two methods, we recommend
going with a sniper approach, because
shotgunning emails to anyone and
everyone is a sure-fire way to burn
bridges. Plus, no one likes spam. And
for that reason, the rest of this lesson
will be centered around the sniper
approach.
So, before we get into actually crafting
your outreach emails, let's quickly talk
about who you should be contacting and
how to find their email addresses. In
general, you'll want to contact the
author of the post if they work for the
website. For example, this is a post
written by Joshua Hardwick on the
Ahrefs' blog. Seeing as his profile
states, "Head of content at Ahrefs", you
know he works there and controls what
gets published on the Ahrefs' blog.
Now, for this post by Josh, there
wouldn't be any use in contacting him
because he doesn't work for SitePoint.
In this case, you'd want to contact the
editor of the blog. To find who that
person is, you can check places like the
website's about or team page, their
write for us page, if they have one, or
their company's LinkedIn profile.
Now, to actually find the person's email
address, the easiest way is to check
contact and about pages. This works best
for websites with one author. For
websites that have multiple people
involved, like SitePoint or Ahrefs, you
usually won't find individuals' email
addresses on their site. So, to find
these emails, you can use a tool like
hunter.io. Go to their email finder
tool, and just search for their first
and last name, as well as the domain.
Hunter will then give you their best
guess. In this case, they're wrong, but
the success rate is generally quite
high. All right, so if you've done the
work for the lessons in this module to
this point, then you should have chosen
one of the three tactics I outlined,
created a list of prospects, vetted your
list, and found some email addresses.
So, it's time to actually write the
pitch.
Now, while there isn't exactly a
streamlined formula for every outreach
email you send, I want to talk about the
anatomy of a simple outreach email that
has been effective for me for many years
now. And there are five main parts to a
typical outreach email.
First is the subject line.
The goal of the subject line is simply
to get them to open the email.
Otherwise, there's no chance at getting
a response. But you don't want to
clickbait them, because that'll only
leave a bad impression. So, when you're
writing a subject line, you want to
briefly and accurately describe why
you're emailing them, and ideally evoke
curiosity.
If we look back at my guest blogging
outreach email from the previous lesson,
I showed you a hypothetical pitch where
I asked if I could write a post for a
golf site and share data I have on the
best golf balls for high handicappers.
So, I might use a subject line like,
"New data. Best balls for high
handicappers."
In my opinion, the new data part evokes
curiosity, and the rest of the subject
line explains the topic of the email.
The next part is the introduction. And
while there are numerous ways to write
an intro, I think it's best to start by
telling them why you're emailing them.
And the goal of this part is to get them
to read the next part of the email.
For example, with our guest posting
sample email, I said, "I was digging
through your site and saw that you have
a couple of posts on the best golf balls
for kids and for distance. But I was
pretty surprised to see that you don't
have one for other types of players,
i.e., seniors."
Now, I will admit that the first
sentence could definitely be stronger,
but I'm basically saying that you've
done this and this, but looks like
you're missing out on an opportunity
here.
The next part of the email is
qualification and justification.
Simply asking someone for a favor and
expecting them to see a mutual benefit
is naive. You need to show them why
you're qualified and justify the pitch
that we'll get to in a second. For
example, if you're contacting someone to
guest post, then explain why they should
accept your post over potentially
hundreds of other submissions. If you're
asking them to add your link to a page
on their site, give them an actual good
reason why they should. So, in our guest
posting sample, you'll see that I said,
"Being a high-handicapper myself, I
spent hundreds of dollars on balls and
countless hours on launch monitors to
find the best ball for me."
So, the fact that A, I mentioned I'm a
high-handicapper, and B, I've tested
numerous balls and gotten factual data
from launch monitors, qualifies and
justifies what I'm about to pitch, which
again, is a guest post about the best
golf balls for high handicappers.
Now, to really drill in on the concept
of qualification and justification,
let's look at an example email for the
skyscraper technique. A little while
back, we did some outreach to get links
to our blog post on SEO statistics. So,
we emailed people with an email that
looks something like this.
Hi name, I saw you mentioned how 93% of
online experiences begin with a search
engine on your page about how to do
keyword research. That's our reason for
contact. We then went on to say, "That's
that is actually 14 years old. More
recent research suggests that this
number has gone down to 68%.
I think it's lower because social and
other sources now account for around 1/3
of traffic."
That's our qualification and
justification for what we're about to
pitch. And obviously, the next part of
the email is the pitch.
The pitch essentially includes your ask,
as well as your value proposition. And
generally speaking, the stronger your
value proposition, the higher the chance
of getting a link. So, for our guest
posting example, I said, "If you're
open, I'd love to write a post for you
about how to find the best golf balls
for hacky golfers like myself." And
here's my value proposition. I'm happy
to share all of the data and stats,
which I think will help people make an
informed decision as they shop through
your store. So, not only are they
getting data for free, but I'm showing
them how that can bring value to their
bottom line. Now, it's not always easy
to think of a solid value proposition.
For example, in our SEO stats email, our
pitch was, "We published this and a few
other fresh SEO stats here. Not sure if
you're actively editing posts, but might
be worth an update if you are. No
pressure."
So, what exactly is the value
proposition?
We're helping bloggers keep their
content up to date. In fact, we didn't
even directly ask for a link, yet we
were still able to pick up 27 backlinks.
We actually have a full three-part video
series on this exact case study, so I'll
link that up in the description, and I
highly recommend checking it out.
All right, the last part of the email is
a simple one-liner to keep the
conversation rolling.
Simply put, you don't want to end your
email with a cold, hard pitch. The
purpose of your first email should be to
start a conversation. So, you might say
something like, "Is that something you'd
be open to? Is there anything I missed?
What do you think? Do you agree with our
conclusion?" Or whatever.
Now, this is just a basic template you
can use as you start blogger outreach,
but I don't want you to limit yourself
within this box. All you're really doing
is talking to people and starting to
build some kind of relationship. Just
think about it like an in-person
encounter. You wouldn't go to a party
and ask a complete stranger to buy you a
drink. You might strike up a
conversation, connect with them on a
common interest, and maybe buy the first
round of drinks, expecting nothing in
return. And as a result, they might want
to reciprocate by returning an act of
kindness. Again, the goal of the very
first email you send is simple: start a
conversation. And this brings us back to
this outreach email that I got.
The person who mentioned me on their
site specifically told me that he's not
looking for a share or anything like
that, and he literally just wants to say
thank you. So, what did that accomplish?
Number one, I actually read his email.
Number two, I responded to him and said
thanks for the mention. And number
three, should he email me again, I'll
probably open it because I'll recognize
his name.
So, while there will be times where it
makes sense to ask for the link or guest
posting opportunity right away, there
are a lot of times when it makes more
sense to just start that conversation
and see where it leads.
The final tip I want to leave you with
is to only use your best work when
sending email pitches. You don't want to
email anyone and everyone for every
single piece of content you create. For
example, if you had a golf site and you
created a post on a topic like, "What is
a handicap?" there's nothing interesting
or unique about it, yet it's still a
topic you would probably want to cover.
Coming up with a good reason for them to
link to you on this topic would be
tough. Plus, time is finite. So, it's
worth doing outreach for your best
content because there's a higher
probability that it'll result in
backlinks.
All right, so with everything you've
learned up to this point, you should be
able to create content for your website
that'll get traffic from search engines.
But there's still one piece to the
fundamentals of SEO that we haven't
covered, and that's technical SEO.
Hey, it's Ahrefs, and welcome to the
final module in Ahrefs' SEO course for
beginners. Throughout the next two
lessons, we're going to be talking about
technical SEO. And technical SEO is the
process of optimizing your website to
help search engines find, understand,
and index your pages.
Now, for beginners, technical SEO
doesn't need to be all that technical.
And for that reason, this module will be
focused on the basics, so you can
perform regular maintenance on your site
and ensure that your pages can be
discovered and indexed by search
engines. Let's get started. All right,
so let's talk about why technical SEO is
important at the core. Basically, if
search engines can't properly access,
read, understand, or index your pages,
then you won't rank or even be found for
that matter. So, to avoid innocent
mistakes like removing yourself from
Google's index or diluting a page's
backlinks, I want to discuss four things
that should help you avoid that. First
is the noindex meta tag. By adding this
piece of code to your page, it's telling
search engines not to add it to their
index, and you probably don't want to do
that. And this actually happens more
often than you might think. For example,
let's say you hired Design Ink to create
or redesign a website for you.
During the development phase, they may
create it on a subdomain on their own
site. So, it actually makes sense for
them to noindex the site they're working
on. But what often happens is after
you've approved the design, they'll
migrate it over to your domain. But,
they often forget to remove the meta
noindex tag, and as a result, your pages
end up getting removed from Google
search index or never making it in. Now,
there are times when it actually makes
sense to noindex certain pages. For
example, our authors' pages are
noindexed because from an SEO
perspective, these pages provide very
little value to search engines. But from
a user experience standpoint, it can be
argued that it makes sense to be there.
Some people may have their favorite
authors on a blog and want to read just
their content. Generally speaking, for
small sites, you won't need to worry
about noindexing specific pages. Just
keep your eye out for noindex tags on
your pages, especially if after a
redesign.
The second point of discussion is
robots.txt.
Robots.txt is a file that usually lives
on your root domain, and you should be
able to access it at
yourdomain.com/robots.txt.
Now, the file itself includes a set of
rules for search engine crawlers and
tells them where they can and cannot go
on your site. And it's important to note
that a website can have multiple robots
files if you're using subdomains. For
example, if you have a blog on
domain.com, then you'd have a robots.txt
file for just the root domain. But you
might also have an e-commerce store that
lives on store.domain.com.
So, you could have a separate robots
file for your online store.
That means that crawlers could be given
two different sets of rules depending on
the domain they're trying to crawl.
Now, the rules are created using
something called directives. And while
you probably don't need to know what all
of them are or what they do, there are
two that you should know about from an
indexing standpoint. The first is
user-agent, which defines the crawler
that the rules apply to. And the value
for this directive will be the name of
the crawler. For example, Google's
user-agent is named Googlebot. And the
second directive is disallow. This is a
page or directory on your domain that
you don't want the user-agent to crawl.
For example, if you set the user-agent
to Googlebot and the disallow value to a
slash, you're telling Google not to
crawl any pages on your site. Not good.
Now, if you were to set the user-agent
to an asterisk, that means your rules
should apply to all crawlers. So, if
your robots file looks something like
this, then it's telling all crawlers,
"Please don't crawl any pages on my
site."
While this might sound like something
you would never use, there are times
when it makes sense to block certain
parts of your site or to block certain
crawlers.
For example, if you have a WordPress
website and you don't want your WP-admin
folder to be crawled, then you can
simply set the user-agent to all
crawlers and set the disallow value to
/wp-admin.
Now, if you're a beginner, I wouldn't
worry too much about your robots file.
But if you run into any indexing issues
that need to be troubleshooted,
robots.txt is one of the first places
I'd check.
All right, the next thing to discuss are
sitemaps. Sitemaps are usually XML
files, and they list the important URLs
on your website. So, these can be pages,
images, videos, and other files. And
sitemaps help search engines like Google
to more intelligently crawl your site.
Now, creating an XML file can be
complicated if you don't know how to
code, and it's almost impossible to
maintain manually. But if you're using a
CMS like WordPress, there are plugins
like Yoast and Rank Math, which will
automatically generate sitemaps for you.
To help search engines find your
sitemaps, you can use the sitemap
directive in your robots file and also
submit it in Google Search Console.
Next up are redirects. A redirect takes
visitors and bots from one URL to
another, and their purpose is to
consolidate signals. For example, let's
say you have two pages on your website
on the best golf balls, an old one at
domain.com/bestgolfballs2018
and another at domain.com/bestgolfballs.
Seeing as these are highly relevant to
one another, it would make sense to
redirect the 2018 version to the current
version. And by consolidating these
pages, you're telling search engines to
pass the signals from the redirected URL
to the destination URL.
And the last point I want to talk about
is the canonical tag. A canonical tag is
a snippet of HTML code that looks like
this. Its purpose is to tell search
engines what the preferred URL is for a
page. And this helps to solve duplicate
content issues.
For example, let's say your website is
accessible at both http://yourdomain.com
and https://yourdomain.com.
And for whatever reason, you weren't
able to use a redirect. These would be
exact duplicates. But by setting a
canonical URL, you're telling search
engines that there's a preferred version
of the page. As a result, they'll pass
signals such as links to the canonical
URL, so they're not diluted across two
different pages.
Now, it's important to note that Google
may choose to ignore your canonical tag.
Looking back at the previous example, if
we set the canonical tag to the unsecure
HTTP page, Google would probably choose
the secure HTTPS version instead.
Now, if you're running a simple
WordPress site, you shouldn't have to
worry about this too much. CMSs are
pretty good out of the box and will
handle a lot of these basic technical
issues for you.
So, these are some of the foundational
things that are good to know when it
comes to indexing, which is arguably the
most important part in SEO. Because
again, if your pages aren't getting
indexed, nothing else really matters.
Now, we won't really dig deeper into
this because you'll probably only have
to worry about indexing issues if and
when you run into problems. Instead,
we'll be focusing on technical SEO best
practices to keep your website in good
health.
Hey, it's Ammo and welcome to the final
lesson in this module. And actually,
it's the last lesson in Ahrefs SEO
course for beginners. In this lesson,
we're going to go through some technical
SEO best practices so you can keep your
site in good health. Let's get started.
So, the first thing you should do is
ensure that your site structure follows
a logical hierarchy. Site structure is
simply the way you organize content on
your website. You can think of it like a
mind map. At the top, you'd have your
homepage. Then you'd probably have main
topics that branch out from your
homepage like your services page, your
blog, and about page. Then from these
main topics, you'd probably have even
more branches to other pages.
These branches represent internal links,
which are just links from one page on
your site to another. And they help
search engines understand the
relationship between these pages.
Site structure also helps search engines
to crawl your pages more efficiently,
which is why having a logical hierarchy
is important.
Now, what we've talked about is pretty
basic stuff, and you may already be
doing this. But it can get more complex
as you add more pages to your site like
blog posts, category pages, or product
pages. We have a full video on how to
use internal links to rank higher on
Google, so I'll link that up for you in
the description.
All right, the second thing is to ensure
your pages don't load slow.
As you may know, page speed has been a
confirmed ranking factor for desktop
search since 2010. And in 2018, Google
announced that they'd be using page
speed in mobile search rankings. Now,
you don't need to obsess over every
millisecond it takes for your page to
load. Google says, "The speed update, as
we're calling it, will only affect pages
that deliver the slowest experience to
users and will only affect a small
percentage of queries." So, bottom line,
you don't want your pages to load slow.
And there are two very basic things that
I think every website should do. The
first is to cache your website's
content.
Caching is basically a way to
temporarily store copies of files so it
can be delivered to visitors in a more
efficient way. And most web hosting
companies that I've come across have
caching features.
And the second thing you can do is
compress your images. Compressing images
makes your file sizes smaller, and
smaller files load faster. You can use a
tool like ShortPixel, which has both a
web interface and a WordPress plugin.
Now, if you want to take page speed a
step further, then it can get quite
technical and complex. So, we actually
created a full tutorial on how to speed
up a WordPress website using Cloudflare
and a WordPress plugin. So, I'll leave a
link to that in the description.
And the final thing I want to talk about
is to do your best to stay on top of
around 50 potential SEO errors.
Trust me, it's not as bad as it sounds.
There are potentially hundreds of
technical SEO issues that can and some
will definitely happen to your site.
Some of these things include pages
becoming broken that still have internal
links pointing at them.
Orphan pages, which are pages on your
site that have no incoming internal
links. And these aren't great because it
can make it tough for search engines to
actually discover them.
Duplicate content issues and redirect
chains to name a few.
Now, there's no point in me going
through 50 different potential issues
because it'll only matter to you if you
run into them. So, what I recommend you
do is run scheduled website audits on
your site. And a website audit will give
you a full analysis of potential issues
that could be harming your website's SEO
performance. If you're an Ahrefs user,
you can do that using our site audit
tool. And even if you don't have an
Ahrefs paid plan, you can sign up for a
free Ahrefs Webmaster Tools account,
which will let you crawl up to 10,000
pages on each website you own.
To get started, go to ahrefs.com/awt
and sign up for your free Webmaster
Tools account.
Then you'll need to verify your website,
meaning prove that you actually own it.
You can do that using Google Search
Console, which is the easiest method. Or
if you don't have a Search Console
account, you can do it manually. Just
enter your domain and click continue.
Then verify your website using one of
these three methods. And I'll actually
just go back and use the Google Search
Console method.
Next, you'll need to import your sites.
And I'll choose to run the first audit
now, schedule weekly audits, and I'll
also enable the crawl external links
option to ensure that we catch any
broken or redirected outgoing links.
Hit import, and the crawl should start
running.
Now, after the crawl is completed, go to
the overview report in your site audit
project, and you'll immediately see
things like your health score, which is
the percentage of URLs on your site that
don't have errors. You'll also see the
top issues we found on your site, as
well as the number of URLs that had the
issue.
So, when you run into an issue, you can
click on the carrot to see a description
of what it means, and also a short
snippet of how to fix it. And once you
have an idea of what the issue is and
how to fix it, just click on the number
under the crawled column to see the
affected URLs.
Then it's just a matter of fixing them
one by one or hiring someone to help.
And since you set up weekly scheduled
audits, you can revisit the overview
report to see if there's any SEO
maintenance you can do.
And that wraps up Ahrefs SEO course for
beginners. Everything you've learned in
this course should be enough to get you
indexed, ranking, and to keep your site
in good technical health. And I've
linked up a playlist in the description
to the entire course with all 14 videos,
which will be free forever. Thank you
for joining me, and I hope you were able
to get a ton of value from the course.
And make sure to like, share, and
subscribe for more actionable SEO and
marketing tutorials. Feel free to browse
around our channel, and if you have any
questions, leave them in the comments,
and we'll do our best to get to each
one. I'll see you in the next tutorial.